[Music]
after more than 7 months of Israel's
devastating war on Gaza which has killed
at least
35,5 62 Palestinians the chief
prosecutor of the world's top criminal
court has sought arrest warrants for
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and his defense minister yav
Galant they are accused of war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Gaza
Netanyahu says it's a complete
Distortion of reality the ICC prosecutor
also wants arrest warrants for three
Hamas leaders for the October 7th attack
in southern Israel a move that has been
denounced by Hamas Osama bin jav begins
our
coverage Starving Children is a
[Music]
crime killing civilians is a war crime
and willfully causing suffering is also
a criminal act those are the top three
reasons the prosecutor of the
international criminal court has cited
for requesting arrest warrants for the
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and defense minister yof
Galant I have raed grounds to believe on
the basis of evidence collected and
examined by my office that Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and Minister of Defense yuav
Galant bear criminal
responsibility for the following
International crimes committed on the
territory of the State of Palestine
several Israeli ministers have denounced
the allegations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity the foreign minister
Israel ker says it's a historic disgrace
and that a special war room has been set
up to counteract the decision but not
everyone agrees Israel will again
protect itself with this wall of the
whole world is anti-semite and the whole
world is against us and it will unite
again the Israelis in a very
nationalistic even more nationalistic
wave and everyone will feel so just and
such a victim by this evil decision I
think it's a just decision the ICC
prosecutors also seeking arrest warrants
for Hamas political and military leaders
isma hania Yahya senar and Muhammad da
there are reasonable grounds to believe
that these three Hamas leaders are
criminally responsible for the killing
of Israeli civilians in attacks
perpetrated by Hamas and other armed
groups on the 7th of October
2023 the Palestinian group says the
arrest warrants for Netanyahu and Galant
are several months too late and rather
than equating the victim with the
perpetration ICC should order the arrest
of all occupation officials who gave
orders and the soldiers who carried out
the crimes if we want to be honest we
should be looking at what it is that the
government the Israeli government has
been doing the orders that it has issued
to its soldiers and it's issued orders
to its soldiers to carry out a genocide
if this court is to have any credibility
it should be going after the people who
are committing genocide rather than just
simply trying to play this game of both
sides ISM for months the the ICC
prosecutor faced criticism as the
Carnage in Gaza unfolded kareim Khan's
critics even at the UN Security Council
criticized what they saw as his in
action to hold Israel accountable seiz
fire seiz fire Israel's allies including
the United States also expressed anger
ahead of Monday's ICC announcement
Target Israel and we will Target you
said a warning letter from a dozen us
Republican Senators they threatened to
cut funding and sanction ICC staff in
their families
this is Gaza today in the mere talk of
arrest warrants is unlikely to have an
immediate impact on the war which has
killed more than 35,000 Palestinians and
displaced Millions more since
October B Javid AL jaaz Prime Minister
Benjamin netanyahu's government has
banned aljazera from reporting within
Israel so we all reporting from the
Jordanian Capital Aman where Imran Khan
is standing by so Imran the the Israeli
Prime Minister
is simply put Furious that the chief
prosecutor of the ICC is requesting an
arrest warrant against him what did
Benjamin Netanyahu
say well there's one key thing that he
said which is now being echoed across
the Israeli political Spectrum it
doesn't matter whether you're the leader
of the opposition like y Leed or whether
you are a Storch Netanyahu supporter or
whether you're a member of the war
cabinet like Benny gance uh like uh the
defense minister y of Galant and I think
this is the message that is being pushed
right now this is the key sentence the
Absurd and deceitful warrant of the
prosecutor in the ha is aimed not only
against Israel's prime minister and
defense minister it's aimed against the
entire state of Israel and that last bit
is absolutely crucial S I could spend
about an hour going through all of the
response uh coming out of the Israeli
political echelons but it's all pretty
much similar uh the reaction is one
where everybody is saying this isn't
about individuals anymore this is an
attack against the state of Israel
that's the messaging uh that's coming
through everybody seems to be lock steep
behind uh that messaging it's even being
echoed in the media why are you making a
false equivalence between us and Hamas
uh this is just absolutely absurd it's
an attack against Israel that's a direct
quote from an editorial that I read this
morning in Israeli newspaper so there
you go that's where we're at right now
in terms of reaction however response is
going to be uh the real litmus test of
how Israel deals with all of this now
it's worth pointing out again Israel
isn't a signatory to the ICC uh but it
is taking this incredibly serious there
have been meetings uh strategy meetings
meetings with legal experts from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs from the
National Security Agency see that's how
serious they are taking all of this and
we're beginning to see the response come
through not only is it about blaming
Israel uh sorry deflecting blame from
Israel and saying this is ridiculous but
it's also about reaching out to allies
President Joe Biden last night said
Israel isn't committing a genocide uh in
Gaza and that's something key that would
be something that the Israelis can hang
on to and point to and say look if the
president of the US has said it uh then
clearly we're not committing a genocide
so that's really where we're at right
now it's it's all about the messaging
it's all about the reaction uh but the
response is what's going to be key and
that's going to be coming uh swiftly and
over the next few days Imran Khan
reporting from Aman the Jordanian
capital thank you very much for all that
context there Imran we'll speak again
just a reminder that prime minister
Benjamin netanyahu's government has
banned aljazera from reporting in Israel
so that's why we're reporting from Aman
now this issue of equivalence between
Israel and Hamas is what I want to get
into with Eric witty former ICC official
who served as an adviser to the former
president of the international criminal
court he joins us from uh from Brussels
so there is this symmetry in Kareem
Khan's statement he goes after Hamas
crimes goes after Israeli crimes and he
ends his statement with quote
international law must apply equally the
lives of all human beings have equal
value this symmetry is very noticeable
and it can't be an accident I wanted
your thoughts on
that yes thank you it's important to
understand what that symmetry means and
what it doesn't mean um what the
prosecutor has said is that the law
applies equally to everyone uh that both
sides in this conflict as in other
conflicts before the international
criminal court are bound by uh
international law uh and their actions
will be equally scrutinized what it
doesn't mean is that the prosecutor is
saying that the actions on one side are
necessarily the equivalent of actions on
the other side or that the two sides are
equal in nature in some way um it just
means that both sets of actions will be
measured not against each other but
against the law that's really
interesting and I that's why I wanted to
raise this topic with you because you've
been hearing our correspondents Hamas
Biden Netanyahu have all the ICC and
they all seize on this point saying that
Hamas and Israel are not equivalent in
Israel's telling of it of course it's
that we're acting in self-defense you
can't equate us with Hamas in hamas's
telling of it they're saying we're being
slaughtered victims can't be equated
with their executioners so both of them
suggesting that the prosecutor has got
the plot completely wrong and that that
somehow negates his request for for an
arrest
warrant those arguments are really a
diversion um
whether intentional or not from the core
issue the international criminal court
is not looking at the justification for
fighting on either side it is not saying
that Israel does not have a right to
defend itself in fact the prosecutor
noted uh in his statement that uh Israel
does have a right to defend itself
against attacks um it's not a a judgment
on the right of the Palestinian people
to pursue uh their freedom
um the question is what means have the
two sides used and not as States but
individual criminal responsibility this
is about the actions of individuals and
not necessarily uh the state involved um
they may have political implications for
those States uh and and of course uh it
has has great political meaning the
impact of this um but what the court is
really looking at are the actions of the
individuals what are the specific
allegations um can it be proven that uh
the named individuals have perpetrated
these uh these acts yeah this is really
interesting because what it what it
tells us listening to you is that both
Hamas and and the Israeli response
totally and perhaps deliberately missed
the point right because the point is
that actions of certain IND individuals
do not comply with international law
regardless of a bigger narrative that
they may want to the frame or shape in
any way there are illegal actions
according to kareim Khan that have been
committed by both the Israeli lead
leadership and the Hamas leadership um
was this perhaps this sort of
symmetrical 50/50 almost presentation uh
of the request for arrest warrants was
we said it was likely intentional by
Kareem Khan was this you think the only
way for him to move ahead with the
case I think it I think it likely was um
I think it's important there's been
tremendous suffering on both sides um
and it's important to think about the
victims on both sides um the hostages
who are still in custody the families of
those killed and missing uh in Israel um
the Palestinians have been subjected to
starvation
to uh the allegation is that they've
been specifically targeted as a civilian
population by Israelis leaders I mean
there's just been massive suffering and
we see it play out on our television
screens every day um and it's impossible
to compare the two uh but what we can
say is that victims on both sides are
deeply deserving of justice of
accountability um and that the broader
International Community has an interest
here
in seeing standards upheld that there
are standards even during wartime even
if you feel your cause is Justified even
if that cause is Justified it doesn't
mean that you can use any means
whatsoever uh to to pursue that cause
Eric let me let me put it this way and
I'm circling around the same point here
is if kareim Khan had gone after just
one side Hamas or even just gone after
both sides Hamas leadership Israeli
leadership but separately different
moments in time wouldn't he inevitably
have been accused of BU and wouldn't his
case inevitably inevitably have lost
credibility I think that was a real
danger here yes um I think it was
important for him to show that the uh
that he was scrutinizing the actions of
uh leadership on both sides of this
conflict all right Eric Woody thank you
so much for joining us I have so many
questions for you we will speak again
next hour I look forward to
that thank you
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al jazer